National E-Health and Data
Management Strategy
Draft for Stakeholder Consultation

Qatar National E-Health & Data Program (QNeDP)
Prepared by:
Date:
Version:

PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC)
June 14, 2015
v2.0

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Revision Log
Version
Number

Date

Changes

Author

1.0

June 1, 2015



Initial Release to QNeDP Steering
Committee and NHS Ministerial Board

PwC Team

2.0

June 14, 2015



Updates from Steering Committee
and further internal reviews

PwC Team

Acknowledgements
The creation, review and refinement of this E-Health and Data Management Strategy would not be
possible without the extensive contributions of the following organizations and individuals in the table
below. A special thanks to members of the QNeDP Steering Committee, Data Management Working
Group, E-Health Working Group and SCH Project Management Office (PMO) for their support and
guidance throughout the development of this Strategy.
Organisation

Representatives

Aspetar



Tom Bell



Nicola Cranfield




HMC



Gay Yeap

Stephen Andrews



Clive Gibbons

Dr. Ali Amer Al-Sanousi



Paul Halliday



Carolyn Madigan



Anupam Gupta



Saad Mustafa



Lamia Al-Barghouti



Gayle Burgoyny

ictQatar



Ahmed Nawaf

MDPS



Heap Chuan Tee

NHIC



Tarek Hachicho



Fahad Al-Dosari



Alexandra Tarazi



Selvakumar Swamy



Robert Moorhead



Steven Archer



Dr. Faleh Mohamed Husain Ali



Dr. Jamal Rashid Al Khanj



Eng. Abdulla Al Yafeai



Dr. Shk. Mohammed Al Thani



Susan Clelland



Inthihas Anachintavida



Irfan Ahmed Syed



Ken Kai Pong Fan



Michael Leroy



Dr. Julio Silva



Paul Casterton

PHCC

SCH PMO

SCH and NHS
Programs

SIDRA

i

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Table of Contents
PART I: THE E-HEALTH JOURNEY ............................................................................ 1
Background ................................................................................................................................ 2
Current State Assessment.......................................................................................................... 4
Qatar E-Health Vision................................................................................................................. 7
Benefits of E-Health ................................................................................................................... 8
Guiding Principles ....................................................................................................................12
Conceptual Model....................................................................................................................15

PART II: REALIZING THE VISION ............................................................................ 17
E-Health and Data Management Governance .........................................................................18
Legislative and Regulatory Changes.........................................................................................23
E-Health Blueprint....................................................................................................................26
Technology Adoption ...............................................................................................................31
National Standards...................................................................................................................35

PART III: STRATEGIC PLAN (2016 – 2020) ............................................................. 39
Mission and Goals ....................................................................................................................40
The Need for Alignment...........................................................................................................42
Implementation Roadmap .......................................................................................................43

ii

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Page intentionally left blank.

iii

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

PART I: THE E-HEALTH JOURNEY

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 1

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

BACKGROUND
In the past decade, the Information Technology (IT) industry has witnessed the
emergence of several new concepts on the health domain, among them: EHealth (or eHealth), Health 2.0, digital or electronic health, electronic health
record, digital hospital and many others. Although each of these terms has
brought its own unique definition and perspectives, they all share the
recognition that health care and wellness management are inherently
dependent on having access to the right data at the right time through
effective use of technology for enhanced patient care and reduction of medical
errors.
Until recently, the ability to collect, process and share
health data was constrained by the lack of
comprehensive digital capabilities, high cost of
technologies and the lack of mature policies,
standards and legislation that would facilitate the use
of health information to its full potential. With
today’s technologies, it is now possible to envision
and deliver on new solutions that address previous
limitations. In addition, there are many opportunities
to leverage best implementation practices and
modern public policies from several E-Health experiences from around the
world.
It is with this purpose and understanding that the State of Qatar, under the
leadership of His Excellency, Minister of Public Health Abdulla bin Khalid Al
Qahtani, has taken the first concrete steps in an exciting E-Health journey that
will promote significant changes on how healthcare services are delivered, and
more importantly, how every individual can be empowered to become an
active partner in the management of their own health.
This journey starts with a simple understanding of what E-Health is trying to
achieve and its scope of influence. For the purpose of this Strategy and all
subsequent projects in Qatar, E-Health is defined as the:

E-Health Definition
“Transformative and continuous improvement of
healthcare through the use of information and
technologies that support the delivery of healthcare
and clinical research.”

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 2

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

E-Health is about
providing better
healthcare outcomes
to the patients; and
about better
effectiveness for the
providers.

Under this definition, E-Health includes most of the information systems, digital
devices, and data analytics solutions that at some point in time process health
data. This definition also highlights the fact that
E-Health is not about the technologies themselves, but rather technology as an
enabler for the positive change in the healthcare system. E-Health brings
together the people, processes and health services in a collaborative union
with a common goal.

Improving healthcare services requires the coordination of
many moving parts, including well trained people who provide
the services, modern and efficient processes to make the best
use of existing resources, and the information systems and
technologies that bring them all together.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 3

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

CURRENT STATE ASSESSMENT
Qatar has a well-developed healthcare infrastructure, comprising both the
public and private sectors. Key aspects of the healthcare services in the country
include:


A significant participation of the eight government hospitals in the delivery
of healthcare services managed by Hamad Medical Corporation (HMC);



More than 30 government clinics managed by Primary Health Care
Corporation (PHCC) that are being re-designed to be the cornerstone of a
new Integrated Health Model for health care;



World renowned specialist centers and hospitals such as Aspetar and Sidra;



A recently established and evolving health insurance scheme that is
transforming how services are funded in the country; and



The Supreme Council of Health (SCH), as regulator, leading an E-Health
agenda to improve the health outcomes through the integration of the
public and private providers and a greater participation of patients in their
wellness management.

Many of these organizations are still providing healthcare supported by paperbased processes and lack the required systems to connect to one another.
Without focused investment to transform its services through the introduction
of information and communications technology, Qatar will be unable to meet
the expectations and demands for excellent health care in the future. The
impacts of an ageing population, chronic and complex conditions, and
workforce constraints are all putting pressure on health services to deliver
more effective healthcare with the current resources.
Qatar’s strategy to deliver a world-class health care has been impacted by the
following four key issues which have been identified as typically affecting
clinical service delivery in paper-based environments:
1.

Safety and Quality: Paper based records, poor integration of systems
and lack of information exchanges put at risk the patient’s safety and
hinder health service quality.

2.

Effectiveness: Lack of digital data results delays or prevents access to the
health data needed for clinical care and incurs significant overhead costs
as a result of the time wasted looking for information.

3.

Decision Support and Research: Questionable data quality and absence
of data analytics capabilities at a national level result in limited
evidenced based decision support and lack of health data for research.

4.

Access and Capacity: The lack of integration between facilities and
external services has a negative impact to service access and capacity.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 4

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

A recent study commissioned by the SCH on the current state of E-Health in
Qatar shows that while there are indeed some areas where E-Health has been
successfully used as a key enabler in the delivery of healthcare, a broad,
cohesive, national agenda and capability are still lacking.

E-Health and data
management maturity
levels of health-related
organisations in Qatar
(PwC Report, 2015)

On a very positive note, there is a strong willingness to pursue a national EHealth agenda among most healthcare providers in the country. This suggests
that most stakeholders in the health sector have a very positive view towards
accelerating the adoption of a formal national E-Health Strategy.
However, a common observation throughout the survey is the lack of ability for
many organizations to implement E-Health solutions effectively. This is largely
due to limited access to skilled and seasoned resources with experience and
expertise in system implementation and change management practices. The
focus, however, should not be solely on technical resources, but to invest in
clinical expertise to ensure clinical buy-in and to assist in change management
and adoption in the healthcare sector.
The current state of data management across the health sector in Qatar also
presents many challenges and is a key focal area for improvement. In general,
organizations have only recently begun to look at the various concerns that
impact the full data life cycle, including a greater focus on data quality, data
stewardship, data sharing, audit and retention.
E-Health has an ability to transform how health care is delivered, but it also
requires strong clinical adoption to be successful. Experience from other
countries suggests that clear focus needs to be equally placed on technical,
clinical and patient perspectives to ensure that the full benefits can be realized.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 5

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

The specific observations from the report have been grouped according to the
four pillars that will be used in defining the E-Health strategy:
Policy and Governance: Covers aspects of organizations, policies and
standards that will need to be established to support the E-Health vision;
Technology and Services: Covers the actions required to prepare the
technical services, systems and telecommunication networks required;
People and Training: Covers the plans to ensure that there will be
sufficient qualified people to implement, maintain and enhance the EHealth Vision; and
Communications and Adoption: Covers the communication activities,
channels and incentives that will be used to promote the awareness and
adoption of E-Health solutions.

Overall, the healthcare system in Qatar seems prepared and willing to begin
the transformation from a mostly paper-based, non-integrated care to a
new model of integrated care that leverages innovation, quality data and
advanced technology solutions.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 6

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

QATAR E-HEALTH VISION
As the State of Qatar begins its E-Health journey, it is essential that everyone
involved share a common vision to help guide investments and activities in the
sector. The vision must reflect the needs and expectations of the various
people and organizations that will be affected, at all levels, by the E-Health
solutions that will be adopted in the country.
After consultation with key health stakeholders, the vision statement for
E-Health in the State of Qatar has been defined as:

A world-class, sustainable, integrated and
secure national E-Health ecosystem for
the State of Qatar.
This vision describes desired characteristics of the E-Health destination. It
brings to light Qatar’s desire to become a world leader in the adoption, use and
development of innovative solutions. It also highlights that the entire
ecosystem be sustainable, allowing organizations to plan effectively and with
confidence, knowing that a national E-Health capability will be supported for
years to come. Additionally, the vision establishes that E-Health is not about a
single system or solution, but is in fact a national ecosystem that provides a
secure backdrop for the integration of systems and health data across the
country for all participants, including achieving a “Personal Health Account” to
provide patient access to their health data. It is not possible to build a modern,
integrated health system without a fully connected environment, where
information can be shared and flow securely across all care settings, whether at
a hospital, clinic, and laboratory or even at our homes.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 7

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

BENEFITS OF E-HEALTH
Change to existing methods and practice comes at a price, but also comes with
expected benefits that will help increase patient safety, reduce overall system
costs and provide better accountability to health system participants. More
succinctly, benefits are expected in five key areas as outlined below.

Better Health Outcomes
Access to quality data in a timely fashion will allow health care providers to
better assess and treat their patients. Today, digital data is not readily
available outside of the organizations that collected them, and even within
organizations, the use of paper leads to significant and potentially fatal errors.
Sharing this data electronically internally and across organizations will provide
a more fulsome account of a patient’s condition, where and why they were
treated, and an ability to better avoid errors and to manage treatment plans
and outcomes.
A focus on data quality will also increase the amount of coded data available to
the E-Health ecosystem. This coded data will provide better insights into a
patient’s health status and allow the use of new, advanced decision support
tools. Moreover, coded data will support advanced analytics and key
performance indicators that will allow health regulators to gain critical
knowledge on patient treatment plans and outcomes, directing treatments that
will better serve patients and improve health outcomes, while driving greater
efficiency in the system.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 8

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Better health outcomes are not just achieved by having more informed
healthcare providers. Patients will have access to important aspects of their
health services through a Personal Health Account. This service will empower
patients to take better care of themselves through views tailored to their
condition.
With the proliferation of personal health monitoring devices in the
marketplace, a patient will also have an ability to upload data such as exercise
regimes and heart rate readings to their Personal Health Account. Their health
care providers will then be able to combine this data with other data already
present in their records and shared through the national systems to monitor
progress against fine-tuned treatment plans.

Increased Patient Safety
Medical errors are often too common due to the lack of timely and quality
health data. As a consequence, patients routinely suffer from duplicate
therapy, drug overutilization and improper procedures. Aggregating and
analyzing this data at a national level will help promote improved patient safety
and a reduction in avoidable medical errors.
This benefit is especially true for medication related errors, which have been
shown in international research (e.g. Singapore and Australia) to represent
between 50%-70% of savings created by national E-Health programs. The main
reason is that avoiding adverse drug events directly results in a fewer number
of patients being admitted to hospitals.
A high priority is therefore the establishment of a national medication record
for each individual. Also known as an “all drugs, all people” solution, this
capability allows for drug interaction checking for prescribed medication
against the patient’s existing drug regimen. When a patient presents at a
health care institution, a medication profile can be obtained to provide insights
into the patient’s health status. Over the counter and out of country drugs
taken by the patient can also be collected by the solution to further reduce the
number of adverse events.
Another E-Health example that increases patient safety is a consolidation of
patient identity management capabilities. Medical errors are made when a
patient’s previous medical history cannot be obtained. This often is the result
of multiple identifiers for a patient that are not properly cross-referenced,
resulting in some records being missed when aggregating health data for
treatment. A national person registry for health provides a reliable cross
reference and helps ensure that all patient records are properly linked. Having
a national personal identifier helps greatly this task and fortunately that is
already available in Qatar.

More Effective and Integrated System(s)
A great share of the health care in Qatar is provided by two government
entities, Hamad Medical Corporation (HMC) and Primary Health Care

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 9

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Corporation (PHCC). Patients being treated by these organizations will soon
enjoy the benefits of the integrated system that is being implemented jointly
by the two organizations. When Sidra opens, patients will also benefit from a
similar high-quality solution that will be connected to the HMC/PHCC system.
If today the majority of service is provided by the public sector, it is anticipated
that in the near future an increasing share of the healthcare services will be
delivered by the private sector and other companies like community
pharmacies, dentists, health clinics and others. The same advantages of an
integrated system environment enjoyed by the public sector should be
extended to the private sector. This will need to be provided by national level
services that will enable Qatar to achieve the benefits of E-Health.
Once this information exchange is established, benefits and efficiencies in the
health system can be realized. This will include a reduction in the number of
laboratory tests (based on previous results already being available), lower drug
prescribing / dispensing requirements (based on medications a patient already
has in hand) and avoidance of duplicate radiology imaging (based on access to
a national diagnostic imaging repository), to name a few examples.
Consolidating other key systems at a national level will also provide for
additional gains in efficiency. For example, managing consent in a central,
nationally accessible solution will allow healthcare providers to quickly and
accurately ensure consent is managed according to regulation. It will also allow
patients the ability to easily manage their own consent decisions using their
Personal Health Account applications.
Another example of integrated systems is the health insurance industry.
Capturing clinical data is important to patient safety and patient care. When
this same data (or a subset of this data) can automatically be attached to a
health claim, it can bring efficiency to the system through a reduction in
duplication of data entry. This has been proven in numerous countries where
dispense data, captured to support a medication history for a patient, is used in
a seamless fashion with health insurance to cover drug costs for patients.

Access to Better Quality Data
Aggregating data and building national E-Health services and systems will have
limited impact without a focus on data quality. This attention begins with
establishing a national Data Quality program based on a robust and
comprehensive framework, supported by education and training of the
workforce, and by implementing feedback mechanisms to ensure continual
improvement. Making decisions on data of dubious quality can lead to
healthcare expenses that may have little to no effect, in some extreme cases,
negative impact on the patient population. It has been estimated, for example,
that up to 4% of hospital visits can be avoided by enhancing best practices,
data quality and guidelines in the outpatient settings.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 10

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

An emphasis on standardized coded data will also enable decision support and
enhanced data analytics services to help direct funding to areas of national
importance and priority, measuring effectiveness of programs to deal with each
condition. Literature studies suggest, for example, that data-based decision
support systems for diabetes can lead to 20% reduced costs.
Not only does the emphasis on data quality support directed healthcare
spending, it also supports a strong clinical research capability of national
importance in Qatar.

Development of a Knowledge Industry
A systemic national approach to developing local talent in Qatar is essential to
establish a sustainable E-Health program. The greater availability of trained
professionals coupled with incentive programs for the R&D of E-Health
innovation will create and foster a knowledge industry that can develop and
bring to market solutions that will improve health care.
The implementation of a national digital healthcare infrastructure will
encourage entrepreneurs and investors in Qatar to focus their efforts on the
healthcare market– either by creating unique local solutions, or by importing
applications that have been successfully used in other countries.
This can range from new applications to monitor a patient’s health, to
providing key reminders for appointments based on key indicators, to
supporting better care through sharing of data across health care providers. As
Consumer E-Health is expected to become a double-digit billion dollar industry
very soon, creating a vibrant E-Health ecosystem that foments and rewards
research and development of local technology will uniquely position Qatar to
become a recognized leader in this exciting field.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 11

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The implementation of the E-Health Strategy will involve dozens of decisions
and compromises. In order to ensure that these are consistently aligned with
the essential goals of this Strategy, it is necessary to define key guiding
principles, for both E-Health and Data Management future project as described
below.

Seven key guiding principles that guide and frame the National
E-Health Program:
1. It is important to demonstrate benefits to individuals, showing how
E-Health can help them to be healthy, how to access the healthcare
system, and how to be informed about things that are important to their
overall wellness.
2. Generating positive value to healthcare practitioners and provider
organizations recognizes the vital role these professionals play in delivering
quality health care. Providing visible benefits to these stakeholders is an
important pre-requisite to promote interest, adoption and change.
3. Promoting solutions that are right for Qatar’s need, recognizing the size
and capabilities of the country, leveraging existing organizations and
solutions and respecting the unique cultural characteristics of its
population.
4. Enabling strong collaboration across all members of the health community
will help promote and accelerate the adoption of standards and solutions

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 12

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

5. The Qatar National Vision 2030 includes a significant focus on developing
local knowledge and expertise through research and innovation. E-Health
can play a significant role in this goal if the right incentives are made
available to entrepreneurs and health researchers.
6. In order to ensure sustainability of the E-Health program, the Strategy
needs to develop the required E-Health skills among healthcare
practitioners and for attracting qualified professionals.
7. Finally, E-Health is not an end in itself, rather it is a supportive
technological fabric that will help and accelerate the achievement of
national health goals established by the NHS (National Health Strategy).
Similarly, in addition to these six E-Health principles, five additional principles
provide the direction to be followed in all data management activities and
plans.

1. A focus on data quality is paramount to the success of an E-Health
ecosystem. Making informed decisions on patient safety through
confidence in the underlying data from multiple organizations will help
ensure maximum benefit to the health system while at the same time
minimizing errors made with incomplete or unreliable data.
2. Data governance ensures that there is accountability and focus on data
usage across the full health ecosystem. It includes oversight on data
sharing policies as they relate to sensitive patient date.
3. A system of policies, regulations and legislation will cover the protection of
sensitive patient data for multiple purposes including primary, secondary

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 13

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

and tertiary care and health analytics. In addition, the securing of this
information from external parties will help build confidence in the E-Health
system in order to maximize health system benefits.
4. Terminologies provide the basis to derive meaning and knowledge from
health data, especially to transform textual data into codified terms.
Active management of terms and the establishment of a terminology
authority (or National Product Center) will help ensure that terminologies
are maintained appropriately.
5. As with the E-Health Guiding Principles, a sustainable E-Health ecosystem
needs to define, attract and build the necessary data management skills
and capabilities in a local workforce.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 14

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

E-HEALTH CONCEPTUAL MODEL
To achieve the E-Health vision that has been agreed, it is necessary that all
components of the E-Health ecosystem be designed and implemented to work
collaboratively towards a common goal: better health for all people in Qatar.
The figure below shows the major components of the E-Health ecosystem that
will be involved in the execution of this Strategy.

Foundational Services

Each conceptual component represents the various resources, processes and
technologies that will be impacted, at some form or another, by this Strategy.

Component

Description

Strategy Implication

E-Health and Data
Management
Governance

Defines the organizations, roles and
responsibilities, policies and processes
of the E-Health Program.

Implementation of E-Health policies and
organizations is imperative for the launch
and success of the National Program.

Collection of E-Health resources,
including people, technologies and
national services, required to support
the collection and sharing of health
information.

Establishment of the national E-Health
services needs to be prioritized in order.
Foundational services, repositories and
systems need to be procured and
implemented early in the program
timeline.

All application systems that digitize
health data at the care delivery points
of services (e.g. hospital systems,
pharmacy systems, lab systems, etc.).

The Strategy needs to promote the use
and adoption of EMR systems in all
healthcare delivery locations, both private
and public services.

Collection of consumer health
applications that include a unified
personal health record and support
health self-management services for
individuals in Qatar.

The PHA is the centerpiece of the
Strategy, as it is the primary window to
the E-Health services for all individuals.
Many of the envisioned benefits require
active participation of patients and
caretakers.

Collection of real-time systems that
monitor specific population-level health
events (e.g. outbreak detection,
contagious disease case management,
system, etc.).

Health surveillance systems depend on
reliable information from healthcare
facilities as well as a secure channel for
direct communication with all providers
and other emergency response agencies.

Health Information
Infrastructure

Healthcare Systems

Electronic Medical
Record (EMR)

Personal Health
Account (PHA)

Population Health
Systems

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 15

Data Analytics and Reporting

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Component

Description

Strategy Implication

Health Data
Services

Consists of the collection, quality
review, aggregation and reporting of
health-related data for clinical and
system-wide use.

With the increasing availability of coded
clinical data, supported by standardized
terminologies, it will be possible to create
advanced data analytics services, for both
clinical and operational health data.

Collection of organizations that
perform health-specific research (e.g.
evidence-based protocols, population
health management, genetics, disease
prevention, health system
performance, etc.).

The health research community will be a
key beneficiary of the E-Health Strategy
once initial services are operational and
more high-quality clinical data becomes
available. However, new policies for the
use of this data will require patient
consent.

Collection of organizations, policies and
processes associated with the payment
for healthcare services in Qatar.

Significant transformation is under way on
how healthcare services are funded. NHIC
is the first organization to collect detailed
system-wide data, and will benefit from
the extended capabilities to be provided
by the national health data services.

Health Research
Network

Health Insurance
Funding

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 16

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

PART II: REALIZING THE VISION

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 17

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

E-HEALTH AND DATA MANAGEMENT GOVERNANCE
Strong leadership and commitment by
government are key factors for the realization
of the E-Health vision and Strategy. This
necessarily includes the establishment of an
empowered governance model with supporting
operational business functions.
The E-Health and Data Management Steering
Committee has provided the leadership and
guidance needed during the development of
the E-Health and Data Management Strategy.
Within its existing structure, the Steering
Committee has been supported by two working
groups: E-Health and Data Management. In
collaboration and in consultation with the
Working Groups, the QNeDP Project Team
designed and validated the various components
of this Strategy.
To ensure the successful implementation of this
Strategy over the coming years, a permanent
governance structure and respective
operational business functions needs to be
formally established.
The proposed governance model is composed of three levels:


Strategic: Where overall direction to the E-Health program will be
established and confirmed;



Functional: Where committees and groups will entertain specific topics
such as lab exchange standards, national E-Health blueprint management,
and clinical coding standards, for example; and



Operational: Leveraging staff and resources from an E-Health program
office to support the Strategic and Functional committees.

Strategic Governance
There are 2 components to strategic governance:

NHS Ministerial
Board will own the
E-Health Strategy



NHS Ministerial Board; and



National E-Health Board.

The NHS Ministerial Board will act as overall owner of the E-Health Strategy.
This includes ensuring that the Strategy is acted upon, adjusted to meet
changing priorities defined by the SCH and other key stakeholders, and
refreshed on a periodic basis. The NHS Ministerial Board will receive

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 18

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

recommendations on these matters from the E-Health Department and from
the National E-Health Board.

National E-Health
Board will be the
strategic advisor for
the E-Health
Program

A National E-Health Board consisting of representatives from various
governmental and private sector providers, health insurance organizations and
academia will be established. The National E-Health Board will help develop
and confirm overall E-Health priorities and act as an external approval body for
key E-Health program deliverables. This can include making a recommendation
to approve a national standard. The current E-Health and Data Management
Steering Committee will transition to the National E-Health Board.

Functional Governance
At a functional level, a number of committees will be established to provide
external oversight to the execution of the E-Health Strategy. These committees
will consist of a broad range of stakeholders that are drawn together for a
specific functional purpose. This can include a detailed committee reviewing
privacy & security standards, laboratory coding and exchange standards, or
even oversight on the National E-Health Architecture.
The following committees have been identified:

Qatar National
Clinical Coding
Committee (QNCC)
will transition to a
new National
Standards
Committee

National Standards Committee (NSC) with responsibility for the selection,
development and maintenance of E-Health and Data Management Standards
that are required to realize the E-Health vision and implement the National EHealth Blueprint. The NSC will provide coordination and oversight functions
across a number of domain specific sub-committees. Membership in the NSC
will initially be drawn from the Qatar National Clinical Coding Committee
(QNCCC). It will serve as a neutral arbitrator for all standards matters in Qatar.
Reporting to the NSC, several Standards Sub-Committees will be established
with stakeholders drawn from across the health sector, covering specific
standardization matters, including:


Data and Coding Standards to manage Data Standards selection and
changes to these standards;



Privacy & Security to provide oversight to the management of privacy &
security standards;



Technical, to ensure common and shared technical standards such as
message transport, data types and use of XML (as an example) are properly
used across all E-Health Standards; and



Domain sub-committees, struck to cover a broad range of clinical and
administrative domains such as Pharmacy, Laboratory, Claims, Diagnostic
Imaging, and others.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 19

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

These sub-committees will be created on an as-needed basis and may start and
/ or end at opportune times, including the rollout of Generation 1 and 2
systems (see Roadmap).

The ARB will be
responsible for the
National E-Health
Blueprint

An Architectural Review Board (ARB) will help refine and provide oversight to
the execution of the National E-Health Blueprint. The Architecture Review
Board (ARB) is responsible for validating, recommending and approving
solutions that support the National E-Health Architecture.
This includes alignment of the architecture to the strategic goals of the EHealth program, including adherence to enterprise principles, policies,
standards, and defined industry proven practices are followed. From a support
perspective, new and existing solutions and changes to existing systems are
reviewed to ensure they are consistent with the E-Health Strategy.

Operational Governance
An E-Health
Department within
the SCH will be
established

National
E-Health and Data
Management
Strategy

A new E-Health Department headed by the E-Health Director will be
established within the SCH. This E-Health Department will lead the E-Health
Program and will be accountable for the execution of the E-Health Strategy.
Operational support for the Functional and Strategic committees will be
provided by the E-Health Department through four different offices:


Strategy Office;



Technology Office;



Standards Office; and



Adoption and Innovation Office.

The Strategy Office will oversee the execution of the E-Health Strategy and
monitor the progress against the Implementation roadmap. A number of
monitoring and reporting mechanisms will be established by the PMO section
within the Strategy Office.
Initially, the Strategy Office will focus on the development and refinement of
national E-Health and Data Management policies that will guide the program as
a whole.
A clear gating process with decision making points will be put in place to ensure
that only projects are executed that are aligned with the Vision and Strategy.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 20

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Benefits Evaluation
and Realization

Besides monitoring progress, the Strategy Office will also measure the
realization of the intended benefits of each project across the following five
dimensions of E-Health Benefits:


Better Health Outcomes;



Increased Patient Safety;



More Effective and Integrated System(s);



Access to Better Quality Data; and



Development of a Knowledge Industry.

The framework that establishes the mechanisms to evaluate the benefits of the
E-Health Program will be defined by the Adoption and Innovation Office and
executed by the Strategy Office.

National E-Health
Blueprint

The Technology Office will plan, direct and maintain the National E-Health
Blueprint activities in support of the national E-Health Strategy. The
Architecture Review Board will be established and be responsible for approving
changes to the National E-Health Blueprint.

National E-Health
Services and
Solutions

In addition, the Technology Office will procure, implement and manage
National E-Health services and solutions included in the National E-Health
Blueprint. These E-Health services and solutions will need to comply with
established E-Health standards and policies as defined by the Standards Office.

National E-Health
Standards and
Policies

The Standards Office will support the establishment and maintenance of
National E-Health Standards. This includes the selection of E-Health Standards,
setting up processes to publish and maintain these standards, and helping to
ensure proper compliance. Alignment with international standards is also a key
function within the Standards Office.
The Standards Office will help establish National Standards for data sets, data
types, coded data elements (terminology) and data exchange. The Standards
Office, in consultation with the Standards Sub-Committees and National
Standards Committee, will develop drafts for consideration. Approvals for EHealth Standards will be through recommendations from the National
Standards Committee to the E-Health Board and through to the NHS Ministerial
Board and SCH.
In addition to defining E-Health Standards, the Standards Office will also help
establish supporting policies to cover the data management life cycle (creating,
using, sharing, archiving and destroying data) and the standards management
lifecycle (standards selection, release management, deprecation).

Support Adoption
and Engage
Stakeholders

The Adoption and Innovation Office will support adoption and uptake of key
outputs from the E-Health department such as E-Health Standards and national
E-Health services and solutions. Communication material, tools and
methodologies will be developed and provided by the Adoption and Innovation
Office to support this function.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 21

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

The Adoption and Innovation Office will also be responsible for all external
communications for the E-Health program and will disseminate new services
and solutions across the country. In addition, it will promote activities in
support of best practices in respect to change management and training, to
healthcare stakeholders.

Certification of
Solutions and
Organizations

Another key function within the Adoption and Innovation Office is to establish
clear minimum requirements that must be met to safeguard the eco-system
and to enhance the ability for organizations to safely and securely exchange
information. A certification process will be set up certify E-Health solutions and
organizations against these requirements. Ultimately, organizations will only be
allowed to participate if the E-Health Solution and the organization using the
solution are certified. Direction for the certification program will be drawn
from various E-Health Standards, policies (Standards Office) and underlying
technical requirements (Technology Office).

Testing and
Evaluation of New
Technologies

Finally, this office will also be responsible to monitor and promote the use of
new, innovative technologies that support the goals of the E-Health Program.
Using pilot implementations, innovation competitions and other similar
campaigns, new solutions will be tested and evaluated to determine their
clinical value, extensibility and integration with the national E-Health services.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 22

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY CHANGES
Qatar has a comprehensive and fine grained State Legal System. The SCH is the
highest authority for the supervision of medical care in the State of Qatar. The
SCH has wide authorities to achieve its role and purpose. Alongside the SCH, in
matters of importance to the E-Health Program, is the Ministry of Information
and Communication Technology (MICT), which is the legal regulatory authority
in the Information and Tele-Communication sector
in the country.
Another unique component of the State Legal
System is the Qatar Financial Centre (QFC)
legislation and regulation. The QFC may be
classified as "stand alone jurisdiction". It applies
its own laws and regulations to the entities
established in or working through the QFC. Many
Thirds Party Administrators and Health Insurance
Companies are QFC registered and regulated
entities. QFC regulations prevail over State laws
for those entities registered with the QFC, unless
there is an express statement to the contrary.
The national E-Health Program will have to be created and governed within this
complex legal framework. New laws, policies and regulations will likely need to
be created to provide the support to establish the organizations, rules and
requirements, incentives and remedies required to fully execute the E-Health
Strategy.

Data Privacy Laws
Qatar does not currently have a specific data protection law. While various
Qatari laws set out certain rights of privacy relevant to the protection of
personal data, there are no specific laws or regulations pertaining to data
protection, protection and management of health data, or data processing
requirements.
A Data Privacy Law is currently being developed by the MICT and will provide
for the first time a comprehensive set of safeguards that defines the rights of
individuals to decide what can be done with and who may access their personal
information that has been collected by other parties.
Alongside this Law, the SCH has also initiated the drafting of a Health Data
Privacy Law to specifically govern and regulate the rights of Individuals in
respect to their health data. Such complementary regulation is necessary due
to the particularly sensitive and personal nature of health data.
A key cornerstone in both draft laws is the individual’s right to grant or deny
consent for data sharing and uses beyond the original purpose for which the
data was collected. Under the principle of express, informed consent, the

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 23

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

individual must be first educated on the required use of their health data for
the purpose of healthcare services, and also be advised if that information may
be used for different purposes in the future (e.g. research, etc.) in the future.
An explicit consent must be obtained or confirmed before personal health
information can be collected and processed.

E-Health and Data Management Regulations
The Supreme Council of Health is the preferred vehicle to regulate E-Health in
the State of Qatar and house a new entity which will oversee the governance of
the national E-Health Program. Based on its enabling legislation, the SCH has
the powers to issue policies, adopt new organizational structures, supervise
technical systems for health data, and set out policies for systems of control
within the health care industry.
These policies will need to address the following areas:


Patient Consent Policies: Defining when and how consent to process
health data should obtained from an individual;



E-Health Governance: Defining the new organization that will be
responsible for executing the E-Health Strategy;



Data Security Policies: Defining security requirements for protecting health
data (e.g. Business Continuity Management, Risk Management,
Identification, Authentication and Authorization, etc.);



Data Management Policies: Defining data lifecycle responsibilities and
requirements (e.g. Data Ownership / Stewardship, Audit, Creation and
Collection, Retention and Disposal, Data Quality, etc.);



Right to Use Policies: Defining the purposes for which health data can be
used by providers in the direct delivery of care to the patient
(e.g. “Need to Know” rules); and



Data Sharing Agreements: Defining the purposes for which health data
may be shared between organizations and terms of responsibilities that
must be observed by all custodians of that data.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 24

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Whenever appropriate, these policies should leverage and build upon similar
regulations that may already exist, either within the health sector or possibly
from other industries as well.
The development of E-Health policies should also review and align, as much as
possible, with international best practices and standards.

Note to the reader
The specific regulatory recommendations will be developed
during the stakeholder consultations.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 25

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

E-HEALTH BLUEPRINT

What is the National
E-Health Blueprint?

Any large construction project requires detailed plans and blueprints. The same
is true for complex IT integration project such as those that will result from the
execution of the E-Health and Data Management Strategy. The Qatar National
E-Health Blueprint is a comprehensive, high-level plan of how to build the
network of systems, databases and technical services that will constitute the
integrated Information exchanges. These national services will provide a secure
and standards-based access to personal health information shared by all
participating organizations in the Qatar health system.
The E-Health Blueprint establishes the national enterprise architecture,
identifying the components, processes, capabilities, and services that will guide
the planning, design and implementation of national E-Health services.

Why an E-Health
Blueprint?

Ultimate Goal:
“better health for all
people in Qatar”

The healthcare system in the State of Qatar is a complex system with the
presence of a great number of healthcare providers ranging from large
governmental healthcare organizations to very small private practices. It is not
surprising that these providers experience very different levels of
E-Health maturity and readiness, and very often do not have the capability to
communicate and share patient information with other organizations.
Increasing the maturity levels of all these entities and creating the IT services to
connect them together is a necessary pre-requisite to ultimately improve the
delivery of healthcare services.
The E-Health vision clearly recognizes that its goals cannot be achieved through
a single system or technology solution; it establishes a national ecosystem
through governed, secure and standardized integration of the many
information systems that collect and process health data.
The proposed architecture will allow participants in Qatar’s E-Health ecosystem
to work collaboratively towards a single goal: “better health for all people in
Qatar”.
These components, capabilities and services were prioritized and influenced
the development of the Implementation Roadmap.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 26

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Conceptual View
The E-Health Architecture conceptual view consists of several components
grouped into six key building blocks that form the National E-Health Services
and Solutions:

External Source and Consumer
Systems
Integrated Care Workflow
Management
Clinical Repositories

The Health
Information
Exchange will
support primary and
secondary use of PHI

Health Data Services
Non-Clinical Registries
Communications/
Interoperability Services

A main driver of E-Health benefits is improved clinical service delivery with
fewer errors and better adherence to best practices. Importantly then, the
External Source and Consumer Systems represent the many clinical
information systems and their respective organizations that will use the
national E-Health services to share and use health data:


Electronic Medical Record Systems: Represents all information systems
residing with healthcare providers that are used to collect and process PHI
(Personal Health Information) at the point of service, including Hospital
Information Systems, Radiology Information Systems and Lab Information
Systems, as examples;

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 27

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

National services to
support key clinical
workflows
integrating
healthcare delivery



Population Health Systems: Represents a set of solutions and services that
will be used to monitor the health status of the Qatari population and
detect disease outbreaks and abnormal health event patterns;



Personal Health Account: Represents a set of innovative solutions and
services that allow individuals to digitally access the health system to
manage their own health and that of other individuals they may be
responsible for; and



Supreme Council of Health, Health Research Network and Health
Insurance Funding: Represents the organizations that process health data
for non-clinical purposes (e.g. health system performance evaluation,
research analysis, claims adjudication, etc.).

Integrated Health Management Services represent a set of functions that
support clinical workflows across multiple delivery organizations. These
services use other national E-Health services and repositories to support
particular clinical workflows:


E-Referral Services: Supports standardized referral process to ensure that
patients are referred to the right practitioner at a healthcare provider that
is properly licensed to deliver the requested service;



Virtual Medicine Services: Support various types of delivering health
services digital such-as E-consultation; and



Medication Management: Supports the prescribing and dispensing of
medications by healthcare practitioners including drug interaction
checking.

Support for other clinical workflows will very likely be added to future versions
of the E-Health Blueprint as needed.

The use of central
clinical repositories
is decided on a
clinical domain basis

The E-Health Architecture also defines several centralized Clinical Repositories
holding patient health data related to specific clinical domains. Over time the
initial list of clinical repositories will be expanded as new data domains become
a priority to healthcare delivery and research organizations.
The decision to create a centralized clinical repository (or not) needs to be
made for each clinical domain. One of the key E-Health guiding principles is to
make use of local solutions and information and, as much as possible, avoid the
need for data duplication.
The clinical repositories can include different types of data:


A standardized summary document containing contextualized PHI
(e.g. discharge summary, visit notes, etc.);

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 28

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Health data is the
most valuable asset
of the national
E-Health services



A complete copy of the clinical record, either as the source system for this
data or a duplicate copy of the information initially created at one of the
EMR systems; and



A simple index entry to existing PHI that includes a brief description of the
data (i.e. metadata) and a pointer to where (i.e. which EMR) that data can
be found.

The E-Health Blueprint, in its current version, defines the following clinical
repositories:


Event Repository: Holding information about encounters the patient has
had with the health system (e.g. visit to a clinician, hospital admission, lab
and diagnostic tests, etc.);



Medication Profile Repository: Holding a complete summary of a patient’s
past and current medications;



Diagnostic Tests Repositories: Holding information about the various
diagnostic tests that the patient has had, including:
o

Diagnostic Imaging (e.g. X-rays, CT scans, ultrasounds, nuclear
medicine and MRI scans, etc.); and

o

Laboratory Tests (e.g. hematology, immunology, chemistry,
microbiology, etc.);



Disease Specific Repositories: Storing information related to a specific
diagnosis or condition (e.g. cancer, diabetes, COPD, etc.);



Personal Health Record Repository: Holding personal data entered directly
by the patient or captured and transmitted by personal medical devices
(e.g. glucometer, blood pressure monitor, digital scale, etc.); and



Record Index Repository: Holding information and indices of PHI stored in
the EMR’s at the various participating organizations.

Some disease specific projects as part of the National Health Strategy 20112016 such as diabetes and cancer project have already designed and
implemented disease specific repositories collecting PHI related to specific
diseases. The E-Health Blueprint does not aim at setting up new repositories
alongside existing ones, but aims at aligning and transitioning existing
repositories to the E-Health and Data Management Strategy and the E-Health
Blueprint.

Transforming health
data into evidencebased knowledge

Health Data Services represent a number of sophisticated systems and tools
that are designed to anonymize, de-duplicate, aggregate, and analyze the vast
amount of digital health data created in Qatar. Data analytics has been used
extensively and successfully in many other industries (e.g. finance, retail, oil

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 29

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

and gas, etc.) but is still in its infancy in the health sector. Some of the
challenges lie with the very nature of this data, which is can be described by:


Volume of data collected at any moment (quantity);



Velocity in which this data is created (speed);



Variety of the various types of data available (specialization); and



Veracity of the information from a clinical perspective (quality).

These services will provide a common data analytics platform with access, as
permitted by privacy regulations, to clinical data that is available in the clinical
repositories and in the local EMRs systems across the country.

Centrally managed
non-clinical registries

Common integration
services provide
communication
between systems

The Non-Clinical Registries represent a set of reference data sources that are
needed to properly exchange patient health information. These include:


Person Registry: Holding basic person demographic data associate with a
unique person identifier that is used to link health data across systems;



Provider Registry: Holding healthcare provider data associated with a
unique provider identifier that is used to authorize access to data;



User Registry: Holding security credentials (both individuals and systems)
that are used to authenticate identities and grant access to services;



Consent Registry: Holding patient’s consent agreements which must be
verified by every system before any PHI can be exchanged;



Health Service Registry: Holding data related to the health services that
the participating healthcare providers are licensed to offer their patients;
and



Terminology Registry: Holding the various standard terminologies (data
standards or codes) that are used to support the publication, validation
and processing of coded clinical data.

Communication and Interoperability Services represent the set of systems and
services that are required to connect, integrate and secure all data exchanges
between participants. They provide trusted access points that will be the main
doors into the longitudinal patient history that becomes available once the
national E-Health services are in operation.
Protecting Patient Health Information (PHI) is a critical job of the national
services. Therefore the E-Health Blueprint defines secure communication
services to secure PHI while it is exchanged by the participating organizations
and stored within the centralized clinical repositories. In addition,
anonymization and pseudonymization services will support secondary use of
PHI by de-identifying it so that it can be used for approved purposes.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 30

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION
The availability of quality health information in digital form is an essential prerequisite for achieving the E-Health Vision and benefits. Most health data is still
processed using paper today and significant effort and investments need to
occur in order to change this scenario. The adoption of modern, standards
based IT solutions must take place across everywhere, including government,
semi-government and public sector organizations.
The E-Health Program will need to collaborate with the various stakeholders to
find pragmatic and creative solutions to resolve this issue and accelerate the
use of digital solutions while implementing the national E-Health services.

Electronic Medical Record Systems
Use of Electronic
Medical Records
Systems is essential

Several governmental and semi-governmental healthcare providers have
embarked or are planning to embark on various programs to implement EMR
systems with a defined roadmap. The current implementation of a single, EMR
system across all HMC hospitals and PHCC sites is the best example of the
financial and organizational commitment of these entities to automate their
clinical processes and digitize their health data.
However, many other providers, mainly within the private sector, do not have
such systems in place and some don’t even have immediate plans to
implement them. This situation cannot be allowed to continue, both for the
quality and safety of healthcare services, but also if the E-Health Vision is to be
achieved.
One of the key priorities of the E-Health Program will be to find ways, through a
combination of incentives and penalties, to accelerate the adoption of
electronic systems in all organizations that deliver health care in the country. .
A robust understanding of program benefits is required for designing incentives
and penalties that promote value generation by stakeholders.
It will also need to establish the minimum requirements, standards and
capabilities that these new systems will need to meet in order to become
participants of the national E-Health services.

Population Health Systems
As recent outbreaks as MERS, Ebola and SARS have demonstrated, disease
outbreak can move swiftly and across borders. It is critical to have systems in
place to help detect, monitor and contain communicable disease in Qatar, and
indeed, the GCC region.
Population Health Systems is a category of applications that perform
continuous, systematic collection, analysis and interpretation of health-related

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 31

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

data at a population level. This data is used for the planning, implementation,
and evaluation of communicable disease outbreaks. If an outbreak is detected,
contact tracing, outbreak management and case management functions are
used to monitor the outbreak and help ensure the outbreak is contained.
Population Health Systems also include preventive measures such as managing
immunizations provided to a patient group (cohort) as part of a vaccination
program. Many diseases can be prevented and / or mitigated through a
demonstrated program of vaccination; knowing which patients have received
specific vaccines can assist in their treatment should it become medically
necessary.

Note to the reader
The SCH is currently in the process of acquiring a new
communicable diseases application that will fulfill many of
the services expected from this category. More information
about the new system will be included once the selection
and contracting processes are completed.

Personal Health Account
The Personal Health
Account is the digital
door to the health
system and data

The National Health Strategy has as one of its main goals enhancing the
wellness of the people of Qatar so that a vibrant, healthy, and productive
society can be established for today, and for the future. To achieve this goal,
individuals need to be engaged and empowered to manage their own health
status and that of other people they may be responsible for.
The Personal Health Account contains a set of innovative solutions and services
that allow individuals to digitally access the health system and that provide a
collection of useful health management tools. The Personal Health Account
aims also at aligning with Qatar’s wider E-Government Strategy and to leverage
some of the National Services that will be put in place, such as:


Single Sign On / Authentication: Utilizing the same set of credentials and
authentication services used by wider E-Government services; and



Digital Mail and Personal Vault: supporting secure e-mail communications
between individuals and the participating organizations.

For example, the Personal Health Account will allow individuals to:


Track and assess their health and that of individuals under their care;



Set health goals together with their provider and record and track their
progress toward these goals, such as lowering cholesterol levels;



Make the best use of doctor visits (either at a facility or virtually).
Individuals can prepare questions for their doctors and share personal

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 32

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

health information collected by them, (e.g. blood pressure, weight, and
glucose measurements, etc.);


Communicate electronically and securely with their physicians, receiving
instructions, advices, recalls and other needed information;



Organize and plan the visits will have with the health system by tracking
appointments, vaccinations, and preventive or screening requests; and



Be educated on their health status and treatments via access to reliable
health encyclopedias and other sources of information.

Most of these functions can be best provided by mobile applications, which is
the ideal channel in Qatar, given the very high use of smartphones among all
segments of the population. However, selecting the right mobile application
can be quite a challenge. There are thousands of health apps available for all
platforms, but the vast majority is not necessarily beneficial to patients.
To help individuals chose correctly, the
PHA will also include a service, called
Apps Formulary, which will guide
providers and patients to the best
solutions. This service provides the
process and standards for selection and
regulation of the apps that have been
tested and accepted for use in Qatar.
Using a process similar to prescribing
drugs, clinicians will be able to
recommend one or more apps to be used
by their patients. The Apps Formulary
ensures that these programs work
properly, are safe to use and can be easily
downloaded by the patient.
The Personal Health Account will continue
to evolve as new and better applications
become available. The availability of
quality, standardized data will also
provide the fertile ground for the
development of “made in Qatar”
solutions and innovation.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 33

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Virtual Medicine Applications
Virtual Medicine Applications, also known by the name vHealth, is a new way
of delivering care by creating disruptive changes at lightning speed. vHealth can
represent many different solutions, from virtual consultations to Do-It-Yourself
(DIY) health offerings, and these are just some of the early technologies in use.
Many other innovative ideas are being developed today that will continue to
transform health services.
The initial introduction of vHealth solutions will be made available to patients
and providers, with the focus on:


Enhancing access to quality services;



Bringing care closer to home; and



Supporting new models of care.

The figure below shows how this shift from traditional to virtual care is taking
place.

Healthcare is moving
from institutions back
to consumers…

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 34

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

NATIONAL STANDARDS
A strong foundation in E-Health Standards will reap significant benefits to the
health system in Qatar. The establishment and management of numerous EHealth Standards will form a strong underpinning of the E-Health Program.
Specifically, this element of the Strategy will focus on:


Core & Fundamental E-Health Standards;



Standards Selection;



Standards Change Management;



Standards Certification;



Supporting Policies, Procedures and Standards Governance;



Operational Support; and



Initial Standards Recommendations.

Core & Fundamental E-Health Standards
There are numerous E-Health Standards available today, implemented in
various parts of the world. These range from HL7, X12, ICD-9 & ICD-10,
SNOMED CT and ISO, to name a few.
Health Data Set Standards: These describe data elements for a particular
clinical or administrative domain such as claims, patient, encounter or EDispense. Health Data Sets (HDS) form the necessary building blocks for a
comprehensive view of data across the continuum of care.
Data Standards: For coded data
elements, the series of valid
values for data elements such as
Route of Administration,
Gender and Diagnosis.
Terminologies are defined
against these coded data
elements and are drawn from
international code sets, such as
ICD, SNOMED, LOINC, wherever
possible.
Interoperability Profile
Standards: An interoperability
profile standard describes the
data elements that are necessary to support an exchange of information from
one organization or system to another. Examples include a prescription, lab
result, diagnostic image or discharge summary.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 35

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Privacy and Security Standards: Protecting a patient’s sensitive data is critical
to ensuring there is faith and trust from patients in the E-Health system. This
includes managing consent agreements,
audit and ensuring appropriate controls are
in place to monitor access.

Standards Selection
One of the major challenges facing
organizations is selecting the most
appropriate E-Health Standard to adopt.
There are numerous standards focusing on
terminology, exchange, clinical concepts or privacy and security. There is no
perfect E-Health Standard that will meet all needs across the spectrum of
health use cases. Therefore, a pragmatic and systematic approach to selecting
standards is crucial. This includes:


Selecting international standards where there is an exact fit (Adopt);



Adjusting international standards to meet Qatari needs (Adapt); or



Developing Qatari standards where no international standard exists
(Develop).

In almost every case, an existing international standard should be adopted or
adapted. The good news is there are few situations where new standards are
necessary. Regardless of adopting, adapting or developing, a structured peer
review with stakeholders across Qatar is necessary to ensure that all affected
groups and organizations have their input into selecting the appropriate EHealth Standards for the country.

Standards Change Management
E-Health Standards are not static and change to reflect new
methods, new clinical procedures and new disease. When
SARS struck, new ICD codes were required in order to track the
outbreak of the disease. Recognizing change to E-Health
Standards requires implementing structured change
management processes based on ITIL (Information Technology
Infrastructure Library) methods. Along with Standards
Selection, this forms a Standards Management approach that
not only organizes changes into Releases, but ensures that
these Releases are structured and published so that they can
be properly implemented into solutions in a timely fashion.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 36

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Standards Certification
An important consideration in the deployment of E-Health Standards is
certification of solutions to these standards. An information system that
cannot properly communicate to a national repository will compromise data
quality and integrity and call into question any interpretation of that data,
whether for patient care purposes or health analytics. It is therefore critical
that a program of conformance testing be put in place to certify solutions
against critical E-Health Standards. Going further, tying incentives and
purchase decisions to select only those compliant solutions will help motivate
software vendors and organizations to pursue certification of their products.

Operation Support
The establishment of a Standards Office with the E-Health Program will help
support the Standards Governance committees and the E-Health Standards
Selection and Standards Change Management functions. Critical roles that are
required include:


Standards Manager, with oversight and responsibility for the Standards
Office;



Release Manager, to orchestrate new Releases of E-Health Standards;



Privacy & Security Analyst(s), to manage privacy & security standards;



Interoperability Analyst(s), to manage Exchange Standards and
interoperability profiles;



Data / Terminology Analyst(s), to manage Data Standards; and



Help Desk Analyst(s), to respond to standards queries and triage requests
for change.

Initial Standards Recommendations
An initial set of E-Health Standards are recommended, subject to further peer
review and approval by the Standards Governance committees. These include:
Health Data Sets: Data elements, definitions and data types are drawn from:


HL7 (Health Level 7) FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource);



Claim MDS (Minimum Data Set); and



MHMDS (Mental Health Minimum Data Set).

Data Standards: Coded values for the Patient and E-Dispense Health Data Sets:


ICD-10 AM;



SNOMED CT; and



HL7.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 37

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Exchange Standards/Interoperability Profiles: Profiles, message and document
standards:


CDA (Clinical Document Architecture);



IHE-XDS (Cross Enterprise Document Sharing);



IHE-XDR (Cross Enterprise Reliable Document Sharing)



IHE-PIX / PDQ (Patient Identity Cross-reference / Demographic Query)



HL7 FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Profile).

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 38

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

PART III: STRATEGIC PLAN (2016 – 2020)

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 39

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

MISSION AND GOALS
While the E-Health Vision provides the overall direction, achieving that vision
will require careful planning and a pragmatic implementation strategy. A series
of coordinated activities and goals need to be executed concurrently in order
to move forward towards the desired end state. These missions are the
cornerstone of the pragmatic implementation of each of the components
described above. Each mission will be tailored to the opportunities,
characteristics and constraints present in Qatar.
The mission statements are grouped according to the 4 pillars of E-Health. The
mission objectives listed below describe the key activities and deliverables to
be produced by the E-Health program during its initial 5-year period.

Each of these objectives help provide the inter-related milestones necessary to
achieve a set of well-defined program goals for that same initial period. In turn,
these goals form the system-wide conditions that will create the mid and long
term benefits that were described previously.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 40

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

In order to evaluate the progress of the E-Health program and adjust as
needed, several specific goals or targets will be defined and monitored
according to the implementation roadmap. These targets will be established
according to a framework structured around three main themes: Digitize,
Standardize and Integrate. These themes and the specific dimensions to be
measured for each goal are shown below.

Note to the reader
The specific goals and targets for the 2016-2020 plan,
covering Gen-1 and Gen-2 implementations will be
developed during the stakeholder consultations.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 41

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

THE NEED FOR ALIGNMENT
The health IT landscape in Qatar is a dynamic and ever evolving sector and
many system implementation projects are currently in-flight across both public
and private sector health organizations. In the absence of national-level vision
and guidance, it is expected that most of these existing initiatives will not
necessarily align with the architecture, standards and governance that are been
brought forward by this Strategy.
With the launch of the National E-Health Program, alignment of these
initiatives, within the SCH or led by external entities, is an important task to be
executed in collaboration with all stakeholders involved. In fact, some of these
projects may provide the early wins for the National E-Health Program.
The following initiatives have been identified to date:


HMC / PHCC Cerner CIS Rollout;



National Surveillance Early Warning System;



National Diabetes Registry;



National Cancer Registry;



National Public Health Strategy;



Laboratory Integration and Standardization ;



Occupational Health Strategy;



e-Government Program; and



NHIC Claims Platform Redesign.

Each of the initiatives above are at different stages of development and will
require a custom approach to maximize alignment, minimize changes and avoid
disruptions. It is essential to the success of the National E-Health Program that
organizations continue improving the health IT infrastructure and the increase
the level of digitization of health data across all their services.
Achieving this alignment will require a continuous collaborative effort, led by
the National E-Health Program, and will need to address the use of E-Health
Standards, compliance with the E-Health Blueprint and integration with the
national E-Health services.
Alignment also includes coordination of the change management activities
across local and national level projects. As capacity and capabilities are limited
in the health IT sector, care must be exercised to ensure that expectations on
results and timelines are compatible with the availability of resources and
avoid change fatigue among providers and healthcare practitioners.
Lastly, the National E-Health Program needs to align with international
standards and the health IT industry offerings and capabilities to ensure that
Qatar can best leverage leading E-Health solutions from around the world.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 42

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

IMPLEMENTATION ROADMAP
The E-Health Vision represents the long term destination, but reaching it
requires a pragmatic and systematic approach that can ensure the success of
the journey.
Realizing the E-Health Vision to its fullest extent and across all organizations is a
long term journey that will require dedicated planning, commitment and
execution. Complicating matters is the fact that new technologies are created
in an ever changing, very dynamic market, where innovation and obsolescence
cycles are shortening at an incredible rate. In addition, there are a number of
concurrent initiatives, as noted in the previous section, that need to be
monitored and reviewed to ensure alignment with national Standards and the
E-Health Blueprint. To keep up with this constant change while at the same
time transforming the national healthcare system is a daunting prospect.
The E-Health Strategy should be implemented via a “benefits-led”
methodology, which reflects current best practices of large scale health IT
transformation programs. This enables the project to focus on those
components of the project that aim to deliver the greatest benefits to all
stakeholders, including patients, providers and the government. The main
aspects of such an approach are illustrated below:

Looking at similar initiatives in other countries, a common lesson is that trying
to do too much at once is a recipe for failure. E-Health projects are by their
very nature technically complex and require constant attention to change
management activities. These challenges are directly impacted by the
ambitious expectations that shape the scope of these projects.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 43

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

The recommended approach in Qatar is to plan for an incremental evolution of
the E-Health services that will begin with initial, simpler goals and build on
these successes as other, more complex services are introduced in the future.
There are 2 Generations contemplated by the Strategy.
The prioritization of clinical E-Health capabilities that need to be realized and
put in place is determined on international best practices and lessons learned.
Typically, by far the largest value is generated by management of medications
and drugs in the primary care/outpatient setting.
Shown in the graphic below is the E-Health benefits assessment conducted in
Australia estimating that the value of introducing Medication Management
capabilities could provide up to 2.7 Billion Australian Dollars over a 10-year
period.

Source: Strategy&

Medication management is also the area where most of the lives are saved by
avoiding potentially fatal Adverse Drug Events (ADEs). For these reasons, a
national Medication Management service to be used by pharmacies is the first
clinical service priority for the program in Qatar, The other clinical service
elements identified as priority areas include diagnostic imaging and e-referrals.
The latter element in particular is important to ensure integrated continuity of
care between different care settings – a priority area identified in the National
Health Strategy.
Slated for rollout in Generation 2 are the clinical services around Consumer
Health and Data Analytics, which will arrive after the other services have
already been in operation for some time to allow for the collection of
longitudinal data.
Each generation will extend for a 3-year schedule, with an overlap during the
mid-year period, as shown in the simplified timeline diagram below.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 44

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Generation-1 (Gen-1)
The first E-Health generation will introduce the foundational services that need
to be implemented first at a national level as they are pre-requisites for all
future capabilities. These include:

Start with
foundational services
and priority clinical
services



Non-clinical registries;



Key clinical repositories and integrated health workflow management
services; and



National Health Information Exchange (HIE).

The figure below shows the proposed collection of systems and services to be
implemented as part of the first generation (Gen-1) of E-Health services.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 45

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

In addition to the HIE and non-clinical registries, a minimum set of clinical
repositories and process management systems should be delivered in
conjunction, as these are the services that will effectively deliver tangible
benefits to the healthcare delivery:


Event Repository and Document Repository: These two services, when
combined, provide a simple but very effective timeline of each time the
patient has been in contact with the health system and a summary
document with the key clinical findings, diagnosis and medical advice
resulting from these encounters.



Record Index: A general index for any type of clinical data about the
patient that has been created and published to the HIE. These may be
records or documents that will remain at each EMR system, and may
include patient family history, clinical assessments, lab results and many
others.



Diagnostic Imaging Repository: A national archive that will contain all
diagnostic imaging reports, manifests and images that have been created
in hospitals or imaging clinics across the country. This repository may also
provide a vendor-neutral image viewer that can be used from any EMR
system.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 46

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Finally, Gen-1 will also include two very important workflow management
systems to be provided as a centralized service to all applicable healthcare
sites:


E-Referral Management: A system that will receive and coordinate all
requests for referrals between healthcare providers, including those from
primary care to specialists, between specialists, from hospitals back to
general practitioners, long term care and/or home care services.



Medication Management: A system that will be used across community
pharmacies, public and private sectors, to manage the medication profile
for patients. It will provide the combined functions of several systems:
o

Drug repository (profiles);

o

E-Prescribing and E-Dispensing processing;

o

Drug interaction checking;

o

Pharmacy practice management; and

o

Drugs benefit management (claims).

This system is proposed as a single national E-Health solution to be provided as
a cloud-service and used by all community pharmacies.
As described above, the first generation of the E-Health services will deliver
important foundational functions, not the least being the connection and the
integration of the many EMRs in use in the country.
As the Gen-1 solutions are implemented, the E-Health Program will proceed to
create the E-Health testing and certification services that will ensure that
products and organizations meet minimum technical requirements before they
are allowed to participate in the national information exchange.
Finally, the E-Health Program team will work with the various stakeholders to
promote and measure the adoption of local and national E-Health systems,
focusing on the digitization and standardization of clinical data.
The chart below shows the various activities that will be required to complete
the implementation of Gen-1, the first E-Health generation.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 47

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Generation-2 (Gen-2)
The second generation (Gen-2) of E-Health services will significantly enhance
the capabilities provided by the national services. Its main focus will be to fully
explore and use information already collected and shared through the Gen-1
services.
Additionally, Gen-2 will begin to deliver on the goals linked to consumer
involvement and empowerment. It is here that the full extent of the Personal
Health Account (PHA) will be provided to everyone in Qatar.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 48

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

The figure below shows the proposed collection of systems and services to be
implemented as part of the second generation (Gen-2) of E-Health services.

The health data services is a critical part of the E-Health Blueprint, as it is this
collection of systems, tools and services that provide the capabilities required
to best use the newly acquired clinical data. These capabilities will be made
available to health regulators, care delivery organizations and research centers
as a national E-Health service.
New clinical repositories are also planned for the Gen-2 scope, and
complement those already in delivered during Gen-1. These include:


Disease Registries: The first of possibly many disease-specific repositories,
it will hold a record of all diabetic (and possibly pre-diabetic) individuals in
Qatar, along with key diabetes management information that has been
collected and/or presented to the patient.



Personal Health Record: A national archive that will contain all clinical data
provided by the individual and not by providers or healthcare
professionals. This repository will be directly associated with one or more
of the Personal Health Account applications.

Finally, Gen-2 will add two new workflow management services to the national
E-Health services: Personal Health Account and Virtual Medicine Applications.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 49

National E-Health and Data Management Strategy

Gen-2 will overlap with the end of Gen-1, and will extend for the last three
years of the implementation plan. First in the activities for Gen-2 is to evaluate
the results obtained with the rollout of the first group of E-Health services.
Given the foundational nature of Gen-1, the evaluation will center on the
digitization of health data and the adoption of the national E-Health standards.
Next, the work continues with the definition and establishment of standards
and the procurement of the Gen-2 solutions.
These will be the first services available to the general public and consequently,
social media will play an important part in the communications approach. The
certification services created during the first phase will also be updated to
include consumer applications, health data quality metrics and virtual medicine
solutions. Finally, as the Gen-2 solutions are being implemented, the Program
team will begin the work to refresh the E-Health Strategy for the following
period, assessing the results obtained, incorporating new technologies and
aligning with the new health system strategy at the time. The chart below
shows in more details the Gen-2 activities that will complete the first 5-years of
the E-Health Program.

Draft for Stakeholder Consultation , v2.0

Page | 50

